I'm going to be talking today
to you about how to take
your application global.
That means providing the same
quality of user experience that
you provide to your users here in
the US and other English speaking
markets to users around the world.
Let's think first of all about why you
care and why Apple cares about this.
Take a look at this pie chart.
It shows a recent
breakdown of our revenues.
As you can see,
a big chunk of our revenues are
now coming from outside of the US.
So we want to sell more systems.
We need your applications
to sell those systems.
And a lot of those systems
are going to be sold and are
sold now outside of the US.
You want to sell more applications.
You want a lot more Mac systems out
there to sell your applications on.
So you need to think about your
customers outside of the US too.
Let me first talk a little bit about
what it is we're talking about.
Let's define some terms.
There are two related disciplines
involved in taking an application global.
One is localization.
Localization is essentially
preparing your application to
be used in a particular market,
making the user experience good
enough and natural enough so users
will want to buy your application.
Internationalization is a
discipline that requires,
it's a design,
methodology,
and it's a set of services you provide,
or that we provide through the system,
that enable you to take your
application to a particular market.
So for example, say you want to take your
application to the Middle East.
Well, if you haven't built your
application so that it can handle
complex bidirectional text,
even if you send it out to be localized,
it's not just a matter of
localizing the strings.
Your text has to be able to
display those strings in Arabic.
So it's more than just a
translation of user interface.
It's also a cultural awareness and
sensitivity to users in your markets.
Apple learned this a long time ago
when we first shipped HyperCard.
We shipped a stack that contained
A number of things that people
thought represented fun.
One of those things was a
woman in a bikini on a beach
playing with a beach ball.
Well, that may be fun to many people
here in the United States,
but in other countries that
can be a source of outrage.
So you have to attune the
content of your application to
users in a particular market.
Avoid cultural faux pas.
So let's look at a typical case.
You start out,
you've written your application.
You have a window that
displays a list of names.
You've done everything,
probably done everything right.
Maybe using Cocoa,
it's very easy to display the text,
bring up the window.
This is the way your application
should look to a Japanese user.
Now, in many cases,
This will just happen for you,
but say there's a point where you're
getting data from the internet somewhere.
and you didn't know how to translate
that data correctly into Unicode.
Your application could
end up looking like this.
So these are some of the points we're
going to cover today and show you
how to avoid this kind of situation.
So what is the ideal global application?
Basically,
it's really the same application
that you've developed in the US,
but it's an application that feels
natural and provides a pleasing
experience to users in any country.
So you've considered the
different content of the language.
You've set it up so it can be localized
without having to change the software.
If you have to completely rebuild your
application to take it to a new market,
that's really a very expensive
process and it's not a good design.
If you want to take it to
any market around the world,
especially growing markets
in the Middle East,
South Asia, then you have to be able to
handle complex and bidirectional
scripts such as Arabic,
Devanagari used for Hindi,
and other languages.
And finally,
you have to be able to present
data in formats that people
understand intuitively.
Date/time formats, number formats,
they vary around the world.
So the ideal we're
presenting is very high,
but fortunately we provide you
with a great set of comprehensive
and powerful APIs to do this.
So these are the things that
we're going to cover today.
We're going to cover basically
everything you need to know to
create that ideal application.
There are a lot of
things we have to cover.
We're going to cover the high points.
We'll point out the important things.
You'll know everything that's there.
You won't know the details,
but you'll know where to go to the
Apple Developer Connection to find
out the details when you actually
sit down and try to solve some of
these problems in your application.
So it's going to be a whirlwind overview,
but it will be complete.
Before going on to our overview,
let's talk about what
we've introduced in Tiger.
So one of the big features
is OpenType layout.
Now, the layout tables are the tables
in the font that allow you
to do high-end typographical
things like compose ligatures,
select variants in a glyph,
swash variants for positional
settings in a glyph,
numbers, old style number formats,
for example.
Now we supported the
OpenType font format itself,
the outline format,
almost from day one in OS X.
We've heard from you.
We know that OpenType
layout is important.
We've begun to add it in Tiger.
We're starting with Roman and Japanese.
We will eventually work our way
through the full set of UniCode.
We'll provide ways for you to
implement that if we don't.
So now if you bring your nice
Adobe font with all of the high-end
typographical features onto OS X,
it'll just work.
And you don't have to do anything extra,
because our APIs handle it,
as long as you're using system
APIs to do line layout and rendering.
We've also provided some
other features in Tiger,
for example, string translation.
You can now take a string of Chinese text
in Han characters and convert them
into the corresponding pinyin,
for example.
Unicode type selection.
This has been available in the Finder
already as an SPI since Panther.
Now we're making it available to
application developers who want to do
their own navigation through lists,
etc.
We've greatly extended the set of UniCode
characters covered in our basic fonts.
These are Times,
Helvetica now contain fairly complete
repertoires covering extended Latin,
Greek, Cyrillic,
and other symbols and things.
We're continuing our
language support extensions.
We added Tamil and Tiger.
No jokes about the Tamil Tigers.
[Transcript missing]
et cetera.
And this is due to our participation
in an organization called
the Common Locale Depository,
which is hosted by the
UniCode Consortium.
We're active members in this.
We get data from them.
We provide data back.
We've considerably beefed up the support
for manipulating some of these formats,
including numbers, date times, et cetera.
You can now spell out the number
the way you say it in English,
for example.
There are new classes
to manipulate calendars,
NS Calendar, CF Calendar,
and the Cocoa and Carbon Worlds.
So for example,
you can pick a Japanese emperor's
reign and iterate through
back to the previous emperor,
if you want to find out who that was.
There's also a NSDate Picker
that provides a user interface
for selecting calendar dates.
Another big feature is we now
support calendars other than the
standard Gregorian format that
most of us are familiar with.
Here's an example of those calendars:
Japanese, Thai Buddhist,
Islamic and Hebrew, a date from each,
shown as localized to the U.S.
English locale.
Note that the calendar is
orthogonal to how you present
it for a particular locale.
Now I'm going to turn over
the session to John Jenkins,
who's going to give you a demo
of some of these new features.
[Transcript missing]
You'll see that the ligatures are forming
automatically just as you would expect.
And in point of fact,
if I bring down the set of ligature
features that are available in the font,
you'll see that the common
ligatures are on by default.
So I can select the text,
I can turn that off, turn that back on.
I can...
[Transcript missing]
The first example here is if I turn
on historical forms and ligatures,
I'm getting long S's.
And if I turn on rare ligatures,
I get an actual long S, long SI ligature,
which is present in Minion Pro.
And for all of this,
we also have letter casings,
so I can turn on small caps.
I can turn on small caps from capitals.
These are all features which
are built into the font,
and I'm getting them without any effort.
One last thing I'd like to show in
terms of the OpenType support here is
the number case and number spacing.
So typically, numbers are monospaced
for lining purposes.
I can make them proportional if I want.
I can switch to old-style
numerals if I want,
which looks better.
Interestingly enough,
Minion is set up so that small caps
turns on the old-style numerals.
And I can override that and force
them back to be lining if I want.
And again,
I can make them monospaced or I can
make them proportional just as I desire.
So all of these features
are defined in the font.
These are percolating up to the user.
And if you're using the
Unicode Drawing APIs,
all of this will happen automatically.
For the internationalization,
we have here a simple application.
This is a Cocoa application
to do diary stuff.
And it's very simple, straightforward.
I can put down,
what is the weather today?
It's a little cloudy.
And I can talk about what
I did and navigate back and
forth just as you would expect.
Now this is, as I say,
is a Cocoa application.
The focus of this session
is on core foundation.
But in some sense, that's irrelevant.
Core foundation and Cocoa are
very heavily toll-free bridged,
which means that you can freely
intermingle the two technologies.
And in point of fact,
even though this application
was written for Cocoa,
it makes extensive use
of core foundation.
And the main things that are different
from this application and a real live
application is the fact that I have
a locale menu and a calendar menu.
And I've done this simply
because for demo purposes,
ordinarily an application would
use whatever the user has set in
the international preferences.
Let's look at the locale menu first.
And the first thing you'll notice
is that this is a big menu.
In point of fact,
it's so big that I'm organizing it by
language and it's still a very big menu.
Now there are a couple of differences
between this and the locale menu that
you see in international preferences.
The first thing is that you have
the umbrella language locale.
This is available so that you don't have
to do a localization over and over again.
For a language like French,
if I wanted to localize,
I can do a generic French locale
and then I can localize and override
that as necessary for Belgium,
Canada, Switzerland, France,
and Luxembourg.
So that's different.
And the other thing that I'm doing
differently is just to be fancy,
I'm getting the name of the locale
as displayed in the locale itself.
International preferences
uses the system locale.
So I can do this fancy text and stuff.
So if I switch to, let's go to Gaelic.
[Transcript missing]
Now that we have support
for additional calendars,
if I switch to another calendar, okay,
now this is my own date picker,
because NSDate picker is a little
too small for our purposes here.
But you'll notice that it has done,
first of all, it switched the number
of days in the month.
It knows what day of the
month the month starts on.
It knows how many days
there are in the month.
So I've been able to query the system
and get all of this information.
And in doing data arithmetic,
if I want to go back a month,
it leaves me on the 26th of the month,
just as you would expect it to do,
because I'm using the system
calls to do the date calculations.
Same thing for the year.
It leaves me on IR26 as I go
back and forth through the years.
So all of this is
happening automatically.
I'm using the system calls.
I'm getting all of this functionality.
And now that you've seen some
of the things that you can do,
I'm going to turn it back to Lee,
and he will show you how to do them.
Thank you.
Thank you, John.
Now all those ancient dates I remember
from Roman history will be of use.
So, taking your application global.
The place you begin this
is at the lowest level,
text storage and access.
In OS X, text means Unicode text.
At the high levels, that's UTF-16.
At the lower level, BSD,
that can be UTF-8.
We use UniCode because it's
comprehensive and of all the solutions,
well it's also a standard,
international and industry,
and of all the solutions out there,
it does a great job given the
complexity of the problem.
Now the one thing to think about UniCode
is it's not simply a 16-bit ASCII.
The problem is too complex.
In fact, it's not even 16 bits anymore.
The current version of UniCode now
contains over 96,000 characters.
And it breaks that 64K wall to get
into that larger character set space by
using something called surrogate pairs.
These are well-defined
ranges of UniCode characters,
16-bit units, that can be paired together
into a surrogate pair.
For example, we see such a surrogate pair
for a Chinese character here.
So the main thing to think about
here is that a UniCode code point
is not simply a 16-bit unit.
Another interesting feature is that the
things that a user sees as characters,
on the screen and in a document are not
necessarily the things that are stored
in the backing store of your text.
So for example,
a base letter with an acute accent,
as in resume or the Vietnamese word viet,
it's backing store could actually
be multiple Unicode characters.
So when you're looking at--even if
you're looking at Unicode code points,
you still have to consider that
maybe what the user sees as a
character is different from what
you're seeing in the memory.
We provide ways for you to manage this.
Finally,
for primarily historical reasons,
Unicode has allowed multiple encodings
of some of these combinations
of base letters and accents.
So for example, all of the commonly
used accented letters,
E with an accent, A with an umlaut,
et cetera, all have two representations
within Unicode.
both as a pre-composed single
UniCode code point and as multiple
code points representing the
base letter and the accent.
And in the future,
all extensions to these kind
of pairs or triples of letters
will come through composition,
not through pre-composition.
A side effect of this though is
that you can encounter multiple
spellings in a document.
has a one-to-one correspondence
with what's in the backing store,
as we see with the word resume.
It may be fully composed, UniCode.
It may be fully decomposed,
or it may be a mixture.
You have to be prepared
to handle this case.
So that's UniCode in 60 seconds.
If you keep these points in mind when
you are working with UniCode as text,
directly as text, not doing line layout,
higher level functions,
you'll probably avoid
a lot of common errors.
So this is UniCode as you look at the
data types that support it in the system.
At the lowest level you
have a UTF-16 UniCode unit,
Unichar, with mixed caps or all lower
case if you're working in Cocoa.
Now Unichar, arrays of Unichars are
fine for storing text,
for passing text around the system,
especially large chunks of text.
But when you need to actually
process a single UniCode code point,
which could be one of these surrogate
pairs or even a 32-bit value,
you need to look at it differently.
That's where you need to
actually extract a UniCode code
point from your Unichart array.
This single UniCode code
point is called-- has a type,
UniCode scalar value, or UTF-32 care.
Now this is, now for example,
if you want to find out the
property of a character,
you want to know if a
character is a number,
if it's a punctuation point, etc.
You first need to get the Unicode
scalar value from your Unichar array,
and then do the test.
And we provide ways in the
system for you to do this easily.
At the higher level are string classes.
John mentioned we have corresponding
string classes for both core
foundation and for the Cocoa world.
And they're toll-free bridge,
as John mentioned, which means that you
can mix them together.
These are CF StringRef,
CF Mutable StringRef,
and Nu and Tiger CF Attributed StringRef,
which allows you to associate
arbitrary attributes to any string
or any ranges within a string.
Now, given that we all now know that
we're going into this beautiful
world of having to deal with very
different processor architectures,
when you're dealing with Unicode,
you have to keep a few things in
mind about the ordering of the bytes.
All Unicode strings in memory
are assumed to be native Indian.
So on Intel,
it's going to be little Indian.
On PowerPC, that'll be big Indian.
The external representation of UniCode
is always going to be either marked
with a UniCode byte order mark,
that's the bomb there.
or it's going to be
assumed to be big Indian.
And this is important,
whether you're getting the
data from a file or you're
getting it off the pasteboard.
It could be in a byte order different
from that which you expect based on
what your application is running as.
So how do you store your text?
Well, the most convenient way
to store text is CFString,
mutable string,
or if you want attributes on it,
the new CF attributed string.
Now it's pretty easy to create
a CFString from a Unichar array.
Just call CFString,
create with characters.
Now if you have Uni, Unicode text,
that's really easy.
An associated problem is how you
figure out what the encoding of your
text is if it's not UniCode text.
I'll talk about that in a few minutes.
Now one thing to think about when you're
using a CFString is that there can be
some inefficiencies if you try to access
each character through one by one.
So a useful function inside
of CFString is a function
that allows you to get the
characters out from what's
called an inline buffer.
This is the fastest way to iterate
through the contents of a CFString.
And then finally, as I mentioned,
we have ways for constructing
and for querying the attributes
of the new CF attributed string.
These attributes can be any
arbitrary attribute you want
to associate it with it,
including font name, font size,
language attributes, et cetera.
So given that the thing
that the user sees,
the character cluster or the grapheme,
as UniCode calls it,
may be different from what's
in your backing store,
you need to be sensitive to this
question when you're allowing a user to
select or to cursor through a string.
Because you want the user to
be able to select a character
in the same unit that they see.
So if they see a single accented letter,
they typically expect to cursor
over that as a single unit.
So we provide ways for you to do this.
Now I want to first note that
this is not for line breaking.
It's only for processing
or cursor movement.
And the way you do this is
you call CFString get range of
composed characters at index.
So for example,
if you wanted to break after a cluster,
what you would do is start
at a known cluster boundary,
call this function,
get a cfrangeback that will tell you
the origin of the beginning of the
cluster that you're at and the length,
sum those two together,
and then you'll be on the
other side of the cluster.
It's pretty easy.
So a big issue actually is not
dealing with Unicode proper,
but dealing with legacy and external
text that's not in a Unicode encoding.
This is very typical when you're dealing
with older non-Unicode documents or
text that comes off the internet.
So the basic problem is to figure
out what encoding you can pass to
one of the functions that creates
a CFString or just converts the
Unicode directly as a Unichar array.
And there are four basic scenarios
that we commonly encounter
where you need to be careful
in choosing your text encoding.
The first scenario is you've got a string
that you use internally to your program,
say to identify a resource
within your bundle,
say a file.
This string is never going
to be seen by an end user.
It does not need to be localized.
So the most appropriate
encoding for that is ASCII,
or if you want to be more general, UTF-8.
Don't try to use the system encoding
because you can actually create problems,
not find that resource.
In this case,
you already know what the string is,
so you don't have to call an API to
determine it-- to determine the encoding.
The next case is when you're
dealing with a plain text document.
Now there's no way,
I mean there are very complex algorithms
that will try to test what the
encoding of a plain text document is,
but there's no really foolproof way.
Currently, our recommended way of doing
this is to query the system for
the current system encoding.
The system encoding corresponds to the
preference that the user has picked
in the international preferences
panel for his or her language.
So when you encounter
that plain text document,
call CFString, get system encoding,
and that will return a text encoding
that you can then pass to one of
these functions to create a CFString.
That will work most of the time.
Now if you have style text,
you have somewhat better information,
especially if it comes from
an older Macintosh system.
Because on the old,
in the OS 9 encoding system,
every encoding corresponded to,
or every font had a
corresponding encoding.
So you can map that font information
to generate a text encoding.
And for that we provide
ATS font get family,
get encoding family,
ATS font family get encoding.
So for each style run within
that style text document,
You just grab the font,
map it to a text encoding,
and then encode that run,
create a CFString,
or translate it to Unichars
using the returned encoding.
Finally,
if you're getting data from the internet,
we assume that you know how to get the
MyIM Charset information from that data,
whether it's mail or HTML.
And that will come as a string.
You pass that string to
one of our functions,
CFString,
convert IANA Charset to encoding.
And that will return an encoding
appropriate for the internet
data that you're working with.
Now let me talk about how you set up
your application for localization.
So the way localization works
on OS X is probably in a way
you're very familiar with.
It's the same mechanism used
to package your application.
It's part of the CFBundle mechanism.
You already know that you can put
resource files associated with your
application into your bundle and
CFBundle will find them for you.
Well, a further step to that is
to add lproj directories.
And lproj corresponds to each
localization that you want to implement.
CFBundle will then find,
when the user has selected
a particular language,
CFBundle will find the resources
that correspond to that lproj.
Here we have examples of English,
Japanese, and I'm sure some of you in the
audience will be able to identify
the third lproj directory.
Now,
a very convenient way to package up your
API is to use what are called Nib files,
which I believe stand for
Next Interface Builder.
Because it's built,
Nib files can be built and
edited using Interface Builder.
Nib files contain whole
UI elements such as menus.
You can use them either
in Carbon or in Cocoa.
Here are some functions
you can call to create
to load nib files in Carbon.
And the beauty of the nib
file is it can be localized.
It's a complete
localization for an element.
And it can handle issues like different
string links that you encounter
when you move between languages.
So you have one nib you
would localize for English,
another for German.
And the much longer German strings
would be handled by the nib.
And also you can farm out your nib
work to third parties if you want,
because you do not have to be a
programmer to build and edit a nib.
Now there will always be times
when you need to use strings,
localized strings in your application.
NIBs may not always be sufficient.
So the way you do that is you
create a localized strings file.
Now, a localized.strings file is
simply a set of key value pairs.
The key is a key that you determine
when you call a function within
your program to get that string.
The value is the localized string.
Here are examples for string files
from US English and from Japanese.
Now inside of your code you'd call a
function like CF copy localized string.
You call it with the key
and then with a very,
what should be a useful comment
about how the string is being used.
The reason for the comment is both
for you as a programmer when you're
looking at your source code to
remember what the string is for,
but also there's a tool called GenStrings
that you can run over your source code
that will output all of the localized
strings as a localized .strings file.
And the output will contain
the key and the comment.
You can then pass that to a localizer
who can read the comment and know how
to translate it into the target local.
And things over to Deborah Goldsmith
who will tell you about a
lot more things like drawing,
etc.
Thank you, Lee.
I'm going to take over as your tour
guide for the second part of our
whirlwind tour of international APIs.
So let's keep on going.
Okay, there we go.
The next topic we're going to
cover is drawing and editing
the text in your application.
Now, the easiest way to take care of text
in your application is to use one
of the text editing engines that is
built into Mac OS X instead of doing
all the drawing and editing yourself.
And for Carbon applications,
they're all based on MLTE,
the Multilingual Text Engine.
Now,
MLTE is a very rich and powerful API,
and we're not going to have time
to go into it in detail today.
There's great documentation
in the ADC reference library,
which is installed on your system and
also available at developer.apple.com.
You should start off with handling
Unicode text editing with MLTE.
A new feature for Tiger that I'd like
to point out is that now if you're
importing or exporting plain text files,
you can control the encoding that
gets used instead of having it
always use the system encoding.
MLTE is great to use,
but an easier way of using
it is some of the prepackaged
versions of MLTE that we have.
One is HITextView that wraps
MLTE up in an HIView object,
which can be part of an HIView hierarchy.
If you're using controls,
you want to use the
EditUnicodeTextControl,
which is also based on MLTE.
You want to use that instead
of the older EditTextControl,
which is not capable of handling Unicode.
And there are APIs available for
creating all of those versions.
One thing that we recommend
that you not do is try to
render UniCode text yourself.
UniCode is not 16-bit ASCII,
and converting UniCode into
glyphs to be displayed on the
screen is a very complex process.
Lee already mentioned
the normalization issues,
whether a given string consists
of pre-composed characters,
or base letters and combining marks,
or a mixture of the two.
So any rendering engine
has to handle that.
In addition, some scripts are
so-called complex scripts,
and the way that individual characters
get mapped into the glyphs that display
on the screen can be very complicated.
Here we've got an example from Hindi,
and you can see that the glyphs,
the characters don't wind up
in the same order once they
get translated for display on
the screen or the printed page.
In addition, languages like Arabic and
Hebrew are bidirectional,
that is, there are some parts of the
text that go left to right,
and other parts that go right to left,
and that's very
complicated to figure out.
We'll say a little bit more
about that in a moment.
Even for so-called simple
languages like English,
you can have ligatures and typographic
features in high-end fonts,
as we saw earlier in the demonstration.
Here's an example of a
ligature in our Zapfino font,
where the word "Zapfino" becomes
a very elaborate ligature.
So all in all, this is something that we
recommend you stay away from.
Let's talk a little bit more
about handling bidirectional text.
UniCode uses something called
the bidirectional algorithm in
order to figure out which parts
of the text go left to right and
which parts go right to left.
Now, Arabic and Hebrew are normally
written right to left,
but they're usually written together
with other languages and also with
numbers that go left to right.
So you're always going to have
two directions of text when you're
dealing with those languages.
In order to figure-- the process
of mapping those pieces of text
to where they wind up in the final
display is rather complicated.
You can have text at the end of a
paragraph that can affect how the pieces
at the beginning of the paragraph get
laid out and what direction they go in.
So in order to figure this out,
you need to look at an
entire paragraph of text.
Now, the system will take
care of this for you,
but in order for it to
do its job correctly,
you have to give it an
entire paragraph of text.
In older systems, using Quick Draw,
you might have used an approach
where you took a run of text
that was all in the same font,
drew it with one call,
then moved to the end of that
and drew the next run of text,
and that approach won't work
for handling bidirectional text.
You have to let the system look at
an entire run of text in order to
figure out where everything goes.
Once it's done that,
you can then break that up into
pieces and draw them yourself.
but it needs the whole paragraph
to figure out where things go.
Now fortunately,
you don't have to worry about
this most of the time because the
system APIs will do it for you.
If you're drawing short strings,
for example,
if you've got a drawing program
like Illustrator and you want
to draw short snippets of text,
then there are several
APIs available for doing that.
If you're okay with
using the theme fonts,
for example, if you're drawing a
user interface element,
you can use HithinDrawTextBox.
If you want a little bit more
control over the fonts and rotation,
CG context stuff,
then you can use one of the
two text box APIs shown here.
One works with text in a CFString,
and the other works with text
stored as arrays of unicars.
If you're drawing a lot of text,
for example,
if you're implementing a word processor
or a web browser or something that has
to do a lot of complex text operations,
then if you're working in Carbon,
the APA that you want to use is Atsui,
the Apple-type services
for Unicode imaging.
And again, Atsui is a very powerful
and very rich set of APIs,
and we're not going to be going
into detail about it here today.
There's a document,
Rendering Unicode Text with Atsui,
which is in the ADC Reference Library,
and I highly recommend that as
a starting point for learning
about what Atsui can do.
I will give a very brief overview
of the architecture of Atsui.
The two most important objects
when dealing with the Atsui
APIs are the text layout object,
which represents one or more paragraphs,
and the style object,
which lets Atsui know where
your style run boundaries are,
and what typographic attributes you
have on a particular run of text.
Not just the font, size,
and style that you may be
familiar with from Quickdraw,
but also things like
typographic features,
such as whether to turn
ligatures on or not.
Atsui is very powerful
and very customizable.
When I say that you give it
an entire paragraph of text,
that doesn't mean you give it
the paragraph and it takes care
of making all the decisions.
You can do a lot of customization
and figure out where all the
pieces of that paragraph,
wind up.
You can even get, rather than drawing,
you can even get a glyph array out
as an end result to the process,
and then you can use that
glyph array with core graphics
and do all sorts of effects,
or you can even get curves and use
those with OpenGL or other sets of APIs.
Well, the flip side of drawing
text is inputting text.
If you're not using a prepackaged
text editing engine or a text control,
you'll need to handle text input
coming from the user as the user types.
Now, if you're already supporting
languages like Chinese or
Japanese in your application,
then you probably know about TSM,
the Text Services Manager.
TSM is the set of APIs that
an application uses in order
to support inline input,
the ability to type a language like
Japanese right in your document instead
of having to do it in a separate window.
If you're already supporting
TSM in your application,
then it's very easy to
support Unicode as well.
Just when you create your TSM document,
you just indicate that it's a Unicode
document instead of an older variety.
You also want to use the TSM document
to support your application.
You want to use the text input class of
Carbon events to receive your input and
not the lower level keyboard events,
because if you work at the
level of individual keystrokes,
the input method doesn't
have a chance to do its job,
and input won't work correctly
for users that use input methods.
So you want to use the -- if you're
using that class of Carbon events,
really the only one you have to worry
about is the Unicode for Key event,
which has a string of Unicode
text coming from either a
keyboard or an input method.
an input method.
In order to support inline
input from an input method,
you just use the same
Carbon events that you would use
in a non-Unicode application,
and I won't go into detail on that.
You can learn about that
in the TSM documentation.
In order to support inline
input from an input method,
you just use the same
Carbon events that you would use
in a non-Unicode application,
and I won't go into detail on that.
You can learn about that
in the TSM documentation.
In order to support inline
input from an input method,
you just use the same
Carbon events that you would use
in a non-Unicode application,
and I won't go into detail on that.
You can learn about that
in the TSM documentation.
Carbon events in your application.
Okay, let's move on to analyzing
and modifying text,
or maybe poking and prodding would
be a better way of putting it.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, let's move on to analyzing
and modifying text,
or maybe poking and prodding would
be a better way of putting it.
So if you're sorting a
large amount of text,
that can make it go much faster
because you're only doing the
prep work once for each string.
If you need to look for a
substring inside of another string,
you can use CFStringFind,
and there's also a version of
that that looks for characters
in a given character set.
and CFString can do much, much more,
but we don't have time
to go into that today,
so I'd encourage you to
look at the documentation.
One thing that CFString can do that's
new in Tiger is transliterate text
and do other transformations on it.
This is something that we had available
in the script manager in world script,
and now we've got a Unicode version.
It can do things like strip diacritics
or translate text that's in a mixture
of different writing systems into
the Latin script or go back and forth
between various writing systems.
It can even replace non-ASCII
characters by the numeric entities
that you use in HTML or XML.
And it has other capabilities besides,
and again, you can find out more by
reading the documentation.
If you put together lists or tables,
you might be in a situation
where you have text that's too
wide to fit in a given space.
Again, figuring out where to truncate the
text is something that needs to be
done in a language sensitive way,
and there are APIs in the system
that can help you do that.
If you're using HITHeemDrawTextBox,
that has an option to truncate
the text to a given width.
But it doesn't modify the text
that's actually stored in memory.
It actually only truncates
it as it's drawing it,
so the original text is unchanged.
If you're using HITHeemDrawTextBox,
that has an option to truncate
the text to a given width.
But it doesn't modify the text
that's actually stored in memory.
It actually only truncates
it as it's drawing it,
so the original text is unchanged.
If you're using HITHeamDrawTextBox,
Okay, we talked earlier,
Lee talked earlier about finding a
place where you can break without
breaking up a user character,
but it's also important to find
things like line and word boundaries.
For example, if you're doing
Word Wrap or double click.
And in fact, line break and word break
are two different things.
Line break is a place
where you can do Word Wrap.
Word break is used for things like
double click or for doing whole
word search in an application.
If you've got an editor
and say find entire words,
you can do that.
And because of that,
they give slightly different results.
For example, if you look at the
French example at the bottom,
you can see it's okay to have
a line break after the hyphen,
but if you're double clicking or
if you're doing whole word search,
you want to treat that hyphenated
form as an entire word.
So the APIs for finding word
or line breaks operate at
the array of Unicar level.
And the way you do that is you create
a text break locator object and specify
the kinds of breaks that you want to do,
whether you're looking for word breaks
or line breaks or what have you.
You can then call UC Find Text Break,
give it an index to start from,
and search backwards or forwards
for the next word or line break.
If you're looking for
cluster breaks in particular,
CFString can handle that,
but at the moment there
isn't a CFString API for
doing word or line breaking.
Lee also talked earlier about
finding the properties of
characters and how when you do that,
it's important to make sure you
get both parts of a surrogate pair.
So you may have a 16-bit character
or you may have a 32-bit character,
and to get the properties correctly,
you need to get both halves
of a 32-bit character.
Examples of properties are things like,
is this character a letter?
Is it a number?
Is it a kind of dash?
And so on.
So there are two
APIs available for doing that.
One is CF Character Set,
which will take a given character
and test it for membership in a set.
Another is UC Get Car Property,
which can return different
kinds of properties.
For example, if you have a character that
is known to be a decimal digit,
UC Get Car Property can tell you
what the value of that digit is.
In order to put surrogate
pairs back together,
there are three very
useful macros you can use.
There are two that are used for
testing whether a character is a high
or a low member of a surrogate pair.
If you determine that you've got a
high surrogate character followed
by a low surrogate character,
you can then call UC get Unicode
scalar value for surrogate pair,
take a deep breath when you say that,
and put those two halves back together
and get the Unicode scalar value.
Once you've got that,
you can call something like
CF character set is long character
member in order to find out whether a
character's got a different property.
So in this case,
we're getting a predefined
character set from CF character set,
the character set of decimal digits.
And we then test our character,
our 32-bit character,
to see if it's a member of that set.
Okay, moving right along.
Everybody take a deep breath,
do some stretching exercises.
It's time to move on to dates, times,
numbers, and calendars.
So Lee talked earlier about locales.
John talked about them also.
A locale is basically a package
of data that represents how they
do things in a certain country
and in a certain language.
Dates, times, numbers, calendars,
and so on.
What currency they use, you name it.
This is different from the UI language.
You may remember that
in John's demonstration,
at no time was the user
interface language changed.
He was always running in English.
The menus were always in English.
However, he was able to change his dates,
times, and so on to different locales.
So the locale is not the same
thing as the UI language.
It's also not the same thing as
the collation order because the
user can set that separately too,
or the text break behavior.
So the most important API to remember
for locales is CFLocale.copy.current.
That will give you a CFLocale object
that represents the user's
current locale preferences,
including any customizations
they may have done.
And there's lots of different things
you can do on a locale object.
I'm not going to go into detail on them.
But two of the more important
ones I'll mention are to get
data associated with the locale.
For example, you can say,
what is the currency
string for this locale,
or what is the decimal point
character or decimal point string?
Another thing that you can do with
a locale that's new in Tiger is
get localized names for things.
So for example, the ISO language code JA,
the localized display name for
that in English is Japanese.
The localized display name for
the country code JP is Japan.
And the localized display name for the
currency code USD is the dollar sign.
And you can find out more about
what you can do with CFLocale by
looking at the documentation.
We're going to go into a little bit
more detail on how to deal with dates,
times, and numbers.
For dates,
there's a core foundation object
called the CFDateFormatter,
and that will convert a string
that represents an end user
date to an internal number
or go in the other direction.
In addition to that,
you can set properties on a
date/time formatter that will
control how it does that process.
So here's an example.
We'll create a CFDate formatter.
And you see we're calling CFLocale copy
current to get the current locale that
represents the user's preferences.
And we're specifying that
we want the long style.
Next, we set the property on this
date formatter to indicate
that we want lenient parsing.
So if we're converting a
date string to a number,
we'll be more lenient
about what we'll accept.
It won't complain if it doesn't
exactly match what the format says.
And finally,
we call CFDate formatter to convert
a string into an absolute time.
Now here's two examples of what a long
style date string might look like.
They're both for June 6.
The first is in the US English locale,
and the second one is
in an Arabic locale.
And you can see that the Arabic locale
does not use the same ASCII digits,
for example.
If you use CFDate formatter,
you don't need to worry
about any of this.
The system takes care of it for you.
As was mentioned earlier,
new in Tiger is calendar support.
We had Gregorian calendar
support before this,
but now we support different
kinds of calendars.
And you can do the kinds of operations
that you saw John doing in his demo.
You can convert between
calendar components,
that is a year number, a month number,
and so on, and an absolute time,
or go in the other direction.
You can say add one month, add one year,
or subtract one day.
You can find out the
first day of the week.
In some countries,
the first day of the week is Monday.
In other countries, it's Sunday.
And you can also find out
the shape of the calendar.
That is, for a given month,
how many days does it have
and what are the range?
For example, you can ask CF Calendar,
what is the range of
days in February 2000?
And the answer is 1 through 29,
because that was a leap year.
CF Calendar can do much more and
you can find out about it again in
the developer reference library.
Numbers are handled in a way
that's very analogous to dates
and times using an analogous
object called CFNumberFormatter.
Again, it converts a string to a
number or a number to a string.
It goes in both directions.
And again,
you create it using the current locale.
CFNumber Formatter also lets you
set a format string if you want to
format numbers in a particular way,
as opposed to using the user's
preference for number formats.
So here's an example.
We'll create a number formatter object.
Again,
that's done using the current locale.
and we in this time we say
we want a currency style.
We have a double which has the value 42
which represents an amount of currency
and we call CFNumber formatter to
convert that value into a string.
And here's two examples
that you might get.
The first is for the German locale
I believe and we get 42 euros.
The second is for the Hindi locale in
India and in this case we get 42 rupees
and again using non-ASCII digits because
that's the way things are done in India.
If you use core foundation
CFNumber formatter you don't
need to worry about this.
It's all taken care of for you.
Okay,
we're at the end of our whirlwind tour,
so again, everybody take a deep breath.
Before we get to the Q&A,
there's a couple of other
things I'd like to cover.
If you have more questions
that we didn't answer here,
Xavier's name is last,
but he's the person you should try first.
He's the contact in Worldwide
Developer Relations,
Xavier Legault.
Or you can contact myself or
Lee Collins if you have questions that
the documentation doesn't answer or that
you can't get answered on a mailing list.
For more information,
you can follow the links on
the More Information page
for WWDC for documentation,
sample code, and other things.
So just go to the main WWDC page,
then go to the Extra Information page
for this session,
and you'll see all sorts of links
you can follow to find out more
about what we've talked about today.